Add examples for nullability and null states (#1192)
dotnet/csharpstandard: standard/types.md

A diagnostic can be produced when a variable ([§9.2.1](variables.md#921-general)) of a non-nullable reference type is initialized or assigned to an expression that is maybe null when that variable is declared in text where the annotation flag is enabled.

> *Example*: Consider the following method where a parameter is nullable and that value is assigned to a non-nullable type:
>
> <!-- Example: {template:"code-in-class-lib", name:"NullableAssignment", expectedWarnings:["CS8600"]} -->
> ```csharp
> #nullable enable
> public class C
> {
>     public void M(string? p)
>     {
>         // Assignment of maybe null value to non-nullable variable
>         string s = p;
>     }
> }
> ```
>

> > The compiler may issue a warning where the parameter that might be null is assigned to a variable that should not be null. If the parameter is null-checked before assignment, the compiler won't issue a warning:

Reviewer: "won't" is strong. Perhaps "may use that in its nullable state analysis and not issue a warning" or similar?

> > The compiler may issue a warning where the parameter that might be null is assigned to a variable that should not be null. If the parameter is null-checked before assignment, the compiler won't issue a warning:

Author: ```suggestion
> The compiler may issue a warning where the parameter that might be null is assigned to a variable that should not be null. If the parameter is null-checked before assignment, the compiler may use that in its nullable state analysis and not issue a warning:
```

>
> <!-- Example: {template:"code-in-class-lib", name:"NullChecked"} -->
> ```csharp
> #nullable enable
> public class C
> {
>     public void M(string? p)
>     {
>         if (p != null)
>         {
>             string s = p;
>             // Use s
>         }
>     }
> }
> ```
>
> *end example*

The compiler can update the null state of a variable as part of its analysis.

> *Example*: The compiler may choose to update the state based on any statements in your program:
>
> <!-- Example: {template:"code-in-class-lib", name:"UpdateStates", expectedWarnings:["CS8602","CS8602"]} -->
> ```csharp
> #nullable enable
> public void M(string? p)
> {
>     // p is maybe-null
>     int length = p.Length;
>
>     // p is not null.
>     string s = p;
> 
>     if (s != null)
>     {
>         int l2 = s.Length;
>     }
>     // s is maybe null
>     int l3 = s.Length;
> }
> ```
>

> > In the previous example, the compiler may decide that after the statement `int length = p.Length;`, the null-state of `p` is not-null. If it were null, that statement would have thrown a `NullReferenceException`. Later in the method, the code checks that `s` is not a null reference. The null-state of `s` can change to maybe null after the null-checked block closes. The compiler can infer that `s` is maybe null because the code was written to assume that it might have been null. *end example*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> In the previous example, the compiler may decide that after the statement `int length = p.Length;`, the null-state of `p` is not-null. If it were null, that statement would have thrown a `NullReferenceException`. This is similar to the behavior if the code had been preceded by `if (p == null) throw NullReferenceException();` except that the code as written may produce a warning, the purpose of which is to warn that an exception may be thrown implicitly.

Later in the method, the code checks that `s` is not a null reference. The null-state of `s` can change to maybe null after the null-checked block closes. The compiler can infer that `s` is maybe null because the code was written to assume that it might have been null. Generally, when the code contains a null check, the compiler may infer that the value might have been null.*end example*
```

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD028 -->

> 

Author: There should be another example that shows how null-checks change the null state. Each of these cause the null state of `s` to be changed to "maybe null":

```csharp
_ = s == null;
_ = s?.Length;
_ = s?[4];
```

>
> <!-- Example: {template:"standalone-console", name:"NullPropertyAnalysis"} -->
> ```csharp
> class Test
> {
>     private string? _field;
>     public string? DisappearingProperty
>     {
>         get
>         {
>                string tmp = _field;
>                _field = null;
>                return tmp;
>         }
>         set
>         {
>              _field = value;
>         }
>     }
>
>     static void Main()
>     {
>         var t = new Test();
>         if (t.DisappearingProperty != null)
>         {
>             int len = t.DisappearingProperty.Length;
>         }
>     }
> }
> ```
>
> In the previous example, the backing field for the `DisappearingProperty` is set to null when it is read. However, a compiler may assume that reading a property doesn't change the null state of that expression. *end example*

> 

Author: Another example should include checking the `x.y.z`. decides that `x` and `y` and `z` are all non-null.

Author: Add examples use field-like events, and auto-properties. (So they have a backing field, or a compiler generated backing field)

A diagnostic can be produced when a variable ([§9.2.1](variables.md#921-general)) of a non-nullable reference type is initialized or assigned to an expression that is maybe null when that variable is declared in text where the annotation flag is enabled.

> *Example*: Consider the following method where a parameter is nullable and that value is assigned to a non-nullable type:
>
> <!-- Example: {template:"code-in-class-lib", name:"NullableAssignment"} -->
> ```csharp
> #nullable enable
> public class C
> {
>     public void M(string? p)
>     {

> >         // Assignment to maybe null

Reviewer: Possibly expand to "Assignment of maybe null value to non-nullable variable"?

>         string s = p;
>     }
> }
> ```
>
> The compiler may issue a warning where the parameter that might be null is assigned to a variable that should not be null. If the parameter is null-checked before assignment, the compiler won't issue a warning:
>
> <!-- Example: {template:"code-in-class-lib", name:"NullChecked"} -->
> ```csharp
> #nullable enable
> public class C
> {
>     public void M(string? p)
>     {

> >         string s = p ?? ""; // null check

Reviewer: I don't regard null coalescing in the same way as a null *check* - I'd expected to see code such as:

```csharp
if (p is not null)
{
    string s = p;
    // Use s
}
```

Author: The `is not` pattern isn't available in 8, but I agree with the general principal.

>     }
> }
> ```
>
> *end example*

The compiler can update the null state of a variable as part of its analysis.

> *Example*: The compiler may choose to update the state based on any statements in your program:
>
> <!-- Example: {template:"code-in-class-lib", name:"UpdateStates"} -->
> ```csharp
> #nullable enable
> public void M(string? p)
> {
>     // p is maybe-null
>     int length = p.Length;
>
>     // p is not null.
>     string s = p;
> 
>     if (s != null)
>     {
>         int l2 = s.Length;
>     }
>     // s is maybe null
>     int l3 = s.Length;
> }
> ```
>
> In the previous example, the compiler may decide that after the statement `int length = p.Length;`, the null-state of `p` is not-null. If it were null, that statement would have thrown a `NullReferenceException`. Later in the method, the code checks that `s` is not a null reference. The null-state of `s` can change to maybe null after the null-checked block closes. The compiler can infer that `s` is maybe null because the code was written to assume that it might have been null. *end example*
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD028 -->

<!-- markdownlint-enable MD028 -->

> > *Example*: The compiler can treat a property ([§15.7](classes.md#157-properties)) as either a variable with state, or as independent get and set accessors ([§15.7.3](classes.md#1573-accessors)). In other words, a compiler can choose if writing to a property changes the null state of reading the property, or if reading a property changes the null state of that property.

Reviewer: Possibly change each "if" to "whether"?

> {
>     public void M(string? p)
>     {

> >         if (p is not null)

Reviewer: Happy for this to be `!= null` given the lack of `is not null` for C# 8.
